Podman vs Docker	CLI compatibility and OCI standards:

how Podman vs Docker compares in terms of CLI compatibility and OCI standards, including commands, usage, and under-the-hood differences.

Quick Overview
Feature		Docker					Podman
CLI compatible	✅ Native				✅ Docker-compatible
OCI compliant	✅ Yes					✅ Yes
Requires daemon	✅ Yes (dockerd)			❌ No daemon (daemonless)
Supports rootless mode	⚠️ Limited/optional		✅ Full built-in
Pod concept (like K8s)	❌ No				✅ Yes

Part 1: CLI Compatibility (Step-by-step)
Step 1: Install Podman
sudo apt update
sudo apt install podman -y

Check version:
podman --version

Step 2: Alias Podman as Docker
To make all Docker commands work via Podman:

alias docker=podman

Or persist it:
echo "alias docker=podman" >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc

Now try common commands:

Command	Works with Podman?	Notes
docker pull nginx		✅ Yes	Pulls from Docker Hub (or other registries)
docker run -it ubuntu bash	✅ Yes	Interactive shell
docker ps			✅ Yes	Shows running containers
docker images			✅ Yes	Lists local images
docker stop <container>		✅ Yes	Stops containers

Full CLI Compatibility. Almost all docker CLI commands work exactly the same with Podman.

Step 3: Run a Web Server
podman run -d -p 8080:80 nginx
curl http://localhost:8080

CLI Differences (Rare but Real)
Docker Command	Podman Equivalent	Why it's different
docker system prune	podman system prune	✅ Same
docker-compose up	podman-compose up or podman play kube	⚠️ Docker Compose not built-in
docker logs <container>	podman logs <container>	✅ Same

Note: Use podman-compose (Python package) if you're migrating Docker Compose workflows.

Part 2: OCI Standards (Open Container Initiative)
OCI = A standard format for container images and runtimes.

Step 1: Understand OCI Components
Component	Role	Used by Podman?	Used by Docker?
OCI Image Spec	Defines how images are structured	✅ Yes	✅ Yes
OCI Runtime Spec	Defines how containers are launched from image	✅ Yes (runc, crun)	✅ Yes (runc)
OCI Distribution	Standardizes registry communications	✅ Yes	✅ Yes

Step 2: Podman Image Format Compatibility
Images built with Podman are:

OCI-compliant
Can be pushed to Docker Hub, GitHub Container Registry, Harbor, etc.
Can be run by Docker, Kubernetes, containerd, etc.

Example:
podman build -t myapp:latest .
podman tag myapp:latest docker.io/myuser/myapp:latest
podman push docker.io/myuser/myapp:latest
This image is 100% OCI-compliant and can be pulled by Docker or K8s.

Step 3: Runtime Compatibility
Podman uses OCI runtimes:
podman info | grep -i "oci"
You’ll see:
ociRuntime.name: runc

Same runc used by Docker, containerd, Kubernetes, etc.

You can even switch to crun (lighter, faster) if supported.

⚖️ Summary Table: CLI & OCI Comparison
Feature			Docker		Podman
CLI compatible		✅ Native	✅ Aliased
Requires daemon		✅ Yes		❌ No
Run as non-root user	⚠️ Workaround	✅ Native
Pod support		❌ No		✅ Yes
OCI image standard	✅ Yes		✅ Yes
OCI runtime (runc)	✅ Yes		✅ Yes
Compose support		✅ Native	⚠️ podman-compose (external)
Systemd support		⚠️ Manual	✅ Built-in
